Those privileged to be present at a family festival of the
Forsytes have seen that charming and instructive sight--an upper
middle-class family in full plumage.  But whosoever of these
favoured persons has possessed the gift of psychological analysis
(a talent without monetary value and properly ignored by the
Forsytes), has witnessed a spectacle, not only delightful in
itself, but illustrative of an obscure human problem.  In plainer
words, he has gleaned from a gathering of this family--no branch
of which had a liking for the other, between no three members of
whom existed anything worthy of the name of sympathy--evidence of
that mysterious concrete tenacity which renders a family so
formidable a unit of society, so clear a reproduction of society
in miniature.  He has been admitted to a vision of the dim roads
of social progress, has understood something of patriarchal life,
of the swarmings of savage hordes, of the rise and fall of
nations.  He is like one who, having watched a tree grow from its
planting--a paragon of tenacity, insulation, and success, amidst
the deaths of a hundred other plants less fibrous, sappy, and
persistent--one day will see it flourishing with bland, full
foliage, in an almost repugnant prosperity, at the summit of its
efflorescence.
On June 15, eighteen eighty-six, about four of the afternoon, the
observer who chanced to be present at the house of old Jolyon
Forsyte in Stanhope Gate, might have seen the highest
efflorescence of the Forsytes.
This was the occasion of an 'at home' to celebrate the engagement
of Miss June Forsyte, old Jolyon's granddaughter, to Mr. Philip
Bosinney.  In the bravery of light gloves, buff waistcoats,
feathers and frocks, the family were present, even Aunt Ann, who
now but seldom left the comer of her brother Timothy's green
drawing-room, where, under the aegis of a plume of dyed pampas
grass in a light blue vase, she sat all day reading and knitting,
surrounded by the effigies of three generations of Forsytes.
Even Aunt Ann was there; her inflexible back, and the dignity of
her calm old face personifying the rigid possessiveness of the
family idea.
When a Forsyte was engaged, married, or born, the Forsytes were
present; when a Forsyte died--but no Forsyte had as yet died;
they did not die; death being contrary to their principles, they
took precautions against it, the instinctive precautions of
highly vitalized persons who resent encroachments on their
property.
About the Forsytes mingling that day with the crowd of other
guests, there was a more than ordinarily groomed look, an alert,
inquisitive assurance, a brilliant respectability, as though they
were attired in defiance of something.  The habitual sniff on the
face of Soames Forsyte had spread through their ranks; they were
on their guard.
The subconscious offensiveness of their attitude has constituted
old Jolyon's 'home' the psychological moment of the family
history, made it the prelude of their drama.
The Forsytes were resentful of something, not individually, but
as a family; this resentment expressed itself in an added
perfection of raiment, an exuberance of family cordiality, an
exaggeration of family importance, and--the sniff.  Danger--so
indispensable in bringing out the fundamental quality of any
society, group, or individual--was what the Forsytes scented; the
premonition of danger put a burnish on their armour.  For the
first time, as a family, they appeared to have an instinct of
being in contact, with some strange and unsafe thing.
Over against the piano a man of bulk and stature was wearing two
waistcoats on his wide chest, two waistcoats and a ruby pin,
instead of the single satin waistcoat and diamond pin of, more
usual occasions, and his shaven, square, old face, the colour of
pale leather, with pale eyes, had its most dignified look, above
his satin stock.  This was Swithin Forsyte.  Close to the window,
where he could get more than his fair share of fresh air, the
other twin, James--the fat and the lean of it, old Jolyon called
these brothers--like the bulky Swithin, over six feet in height,
but very lean, as though destined from his birth to strike a
balance and maintain an average, brooded over the scene with his
permanent stoop; his grey eyes had an air of fixed absorption in
some secret worry, broken at intervals by a rapid, shifting
scrutiny of surrounding facts; his cheeks, thinned by two
parallel folds, and a long, clean-shaven upper lip, were framed
within Dundreary whiskers.  In his hands he turned and turned a
piece of china.  Not far off, listening to a lady in brown, his
only son Soames, pale and well-shaved, dark-haired, rather bald,
had poked his chin up sideways, carrying his nose with that
aforesaid appearance of 'sniff,' as though despising an egg which
he knew he could not digest.  Behind him his cousin, the tall
George, son of the fifth Forsyte, Roger, had a Quilpish look on
his fleshy face, pondering one of his sardonic jests.  Something
inherent to the occasion had affected them all.
Seated in a row close to one another were three  ladies--Aunts
Ann, Hester (the two Forsyte maids), and Juley (short for Julia),
who not in first youth had so far forgotten herself as to marry
Septimus Small, a man of poor constitution.  She had survived him
for many years.  With her elder and younger sister she lived now
in the house of Timothy, her sixth and youngest brother, on the
Bayswater Road.  Each of these ladies held fans in their hands,
and each with some touch of Colour, some emphatic feather or
brooch, testified to the solemnity of the opportunity.
In the centre of the room, under the chandelier, as became a
host, stood the head of the family, old Jolyon himself.  Eighty
years of age, with his fine, white hair, his dome-like forehead,
his little, dark grey eyes, and an immense white moustache, which
drooped and spread below the level of his strong jaw, he had a
patriarchal look, and in spite of lean cheeks and hollows at his
temples, seemed master of perennial youth.  He held him self
extremely upright, and his shrewd, steady  eyes had lost none of
their clear shining.  Thus  he gave an impression of superiority
to the  doubts and dislikes of smaller men.  Having had  his own
way for innumerable years, he had  earned a prescriptive right to
it.  It would never have occurred to old Jolyon that it was
necessary to wear a look of doubt or of defiance.
Between him and the four other brothers who were present, James,
Swithin, Nicholas, and Roger, there was much difference, much
similarity.  In turn, each of these four brothers was very
different from the other, yet they, too, were alike.
Through the varying features and expression  of those five faces
could be marked a certain  steadfastness of chin, underlying
surface distinctions, marking a racial stamp, too prehistoric to
trace, too remote and permanent to discuss--the  very hall-mark
and guarantee of the family for tunes.
Among the younger generation, in the tall, bull-like George, in
pallid strenuous Archibald, in young Nicholas with his sweet and
tentative obstinacy, in the grave and foppishly determined
Eustace, there was this same stamp--less meaningful perhaps, but
unmistakable--a sign of something ineradicable in the family
soul. At one time or another during the afternoon, all these
faces, so dissimilar and so alike, had worn an expression of
distrust, the object of which was undoubtedly the man whose
acquaintance they were thus assembled to make.  Philip Bosinney
was known to be a young man without fortune, but Forsyte girls
had become engaged to such before, and had actually married them.
It was not altogether for this reason, therefore, that the minds
of the Forsytes misgave them.  They could not have explained the
origin of a misgiving obscured by the mist of family gossip.  A
story was undoubtedly told that he had paid his duty call to
Aunts Ann, Juley, and Hester, in a soft grey hat--a soft grey
hat, not even a new one--a dusty thing with a shapeless crown.
"So, extraordinary, my dear--so odd," Aunt Hester, passing
through the little, dark hall (she was rather short-sighted), had
tried to 'shoo' it off a chair, taking it for a strange,
disreputable cat--Tommy had such disgraceful friends!  She was
disturbed when it did not move.  Like an artist for ever seeking
to discover the significant trifle which embodies the whole
character of a scene, or place, or person, so those unconscious
artists--the Forsytes had fastened by intuition on this hat; it
was their significant trifle, the detail in which was embedded
the meaning of the whole matter; for each had asked himself:
"Come, now, should I have paid that visit in that hat?" and each
had answered "No!" and some, with more imagination than others,
had added: "It would never have come into my head!"
George, on hearing the story, grinned.  The hat had obviously
been worn as a practical joke!  He himself was a connoisseur of
such. "Very haughty!" he said, "the wild Buccaneer."
And this mot, the 'Buccaneer,' was bandied from mouth to mouth,
till it became the favourite mode of alluding to Bosinney.
Her aunts reproached June afterwards about the hat.
"We don't think you ought to let him, dear!" they had said.
June had answered in her imperious brisk way, like the little
embodiment of will she was:  "Oh! what does it matter?  Phil
never knows what he's got on!"
No one had credited an answer so outrageous.  A man not to know
what he had on?  No, no!  What indeed was this young man, who, in
becoming engaged to June, old Jolyon's acknowledged heiress, had
done so well for himself?  He was an architect, not in itself a
sufficient reason for wearing such a hat.  None of the Forsytes
happened to be architects, but one of them knew two architects
who would never have worn such a hat upon a call of ceremony in
the London season.
Dangerous--ah, dangerous!  June, of course, had not seen this,
but, though not yet nineteen, she was notorious.  Had she not
said to Mrs. Soames--who was always so beautifully dressed--that
feathers were vulgar?  Mrs. Soames had actually given up wearing
feathers, so dreadfully downright was dear June!
These misgivings, this disapproval, and perfectly genuine
distrust, did not prevent the Forsytes from gathering to old
Jolyon's invitation.  An 'At Home' at Stanhope Gate was a great
rarity; none had been held for twelve years, not indeed, since
old Mrs. Jolyon had died.
Never had there been so full an assembly, for, mysteriously
united in spite of all their differences, they had taken arms
against a common peril.  Like cattle when a dog comes into the
field, they stood head to head and shoulder to shoulder, prepared
to run upon and trample the invader to death.  They had come,
too, no doubt, to get some notion of what sort of presents they
would ultimately be expected to give; for though the question of
wedding gifts was usually graduated in this way: 'What are you
givin?  Nicholas is givin' spoons!'--so very much depended on the
bridegroom.  If he were sleek, well-brushed, prosperous-looking,
it was more necessary to give him nice things; he would expect
them.  In the end each gave exactly what was right and proper, by
a species of family adjustment arrived at as prices are arrived
at on the Stock Exchange--the exact niceties being regulated at
Timothy's commodious, red-brick residence in Bayswater,
overlooking the Park, where dwelt Aunts Ann, Juley, and Hester.
The uneasiness of the Forsyte family has been justified by the
simple mention of the hat.  How impossible and wrong would it
have been for any family, with the regard for appearances which
should ever characterize, the great upper middle-class, to feel
otherwise than uneasy!
The author of the uneasiness stood talking to June by the further
door; his curly hair had a rumpled appearance, as though he found
what was going on around him unusual.  He had an air, too, of
having a joke all to himself.  George, speaking aside to his
brother, Eustace, said:
"Looks as if he might make a bolt of it--the dashing Buccaneer!"
This 'very singular-looking man,' as Mrs. Small afterwards called
him, was of medium height and strong build, with a pale, brown
face, a dust-coloured moustache, very prominent cheek-bones, and
hollow checks.  His forehead sloped back towards the crown of his
head, and bulged out in bumps over the eyes, like foreheads seen
in the Lion-house at the Zoo.  He had sherry-coloured eyes,
disconcertingly inattentive at times.  Old Jolyon's coachman,
after driving June and Bosinney to the theatre, had remarked to
the butler:
"I dunno what to make of 'im.  Looks to me for all the world like
an 'alf-tame leopard." And every now and then a Forsyte would
come up, sidle round, and take a look at him.
June stood in front, fending off this idle curiosity--a little
bit of a thing, as somebody once said, 'all hair and spirit,'
with fearless blue eyes, a firm jaw, and a bright colour, whose
face and body seemed too slender for her crown of red-gold hair.
A tall woman, with a beautiful figure, which some member of the
family had once compared to a heathen goddess, stood looking at
these two with a shadowy smile.
Her hands, gloved in French grey, were crossed one over the
other, her grave, charming face held to one side, and the eyes of
all men near were fastened on it.  Her figure swayed, so balanced
that the very air seemed to set it moving.  There was warmth, but
little colour, in her cheeks; her large, dark eyes were soft.
But it was at her lips--asking a question, giving an answer, with
that shadowy smile--that men looked; they were sensitive lips,
sensuous and sweet, and through them seemed to come warmth and
perfume like the warmth and perfume of a flower.
The engaged couple thus scrutinized were unconscious of this
passive goddess.  It was Bosinney who first noticed her, and
asked her name.
June took her lover up to the woman with the beautiful figure.
"Irene is my greatest chum," she said: "Please be good friends,
you two!"
At the little lady's command they all three smiled; and while
they were smiling, Soames Forsyte, silently appearing from behind
the woman with the beautiful figure, who was his wife, said:
"Ah!  introduce me too!"
He was seldom, indeed, far from Irene's side at public functions,
and even when separated by, the exigencies of social intercourse,
could be seen following her about with his eyes, in which were
strange expressions of watchfulness and longing.
At the window his father, James, was still scrutinizing the marks
on the piece of china..
"I wonder at Jolyon's allowing this engagement," he said to Aunt
Ann.  "They tell me there's no chance of their getting married
for years.  This young Bosinney" (he made the word a dactyl in
opposition to general usage of a short o) "has got nothing.  When
Winifred married Dartie, I made him bring every penny into
settlement--lucky thing, too--they'd ha' had nothing by this
time!"
Aunt Ann looked up from her velvet chair.  Grey curls banded her
forehead, curls that, unchanged for decades, had extinguished in
the family all sense of time.  She made no reply, for she rarely
spoke, husbanding her aged voice; but to James, uneasy of
conscience, her look was as good as an answer.
"Well," he said, "I couldn't help Irene's having no money.
Soames was in such a hurry; he got quite thin dancing attendance
on her."
Putting the bowl pettishly down on the piano, he let his eyes
wander to the group by the door.
"It's my opinion," he said unexpectedly, "that it's just as well
as it is."
Aunt Ann did not ask him to explain this strange utterance.  She
knew what he was thinking.  If Irene had no money she would not
be so foolish as to do anything wrong; for they said--they said--
she had been asking for a separate room; but, of course, Soames
had not....
James interrupted her reverie:
"But where," he asked, "was Timothy?  Hadn't he come with them?"
Through Aunt Ann's compressed lips a tender smile forced its way:
"No, he didn't think it wise, with so much of this diphtheria
about; and he so liable to take things."
James answered:
"Well, be takes good care of himself.  I can't afford to take the
care of myself that he does."
Nor was it easy to say which, of admiration, envy, or contempt,
was dominant in that remark.
Timothy, indeed, was seldom seen.  The baby of the family, a
publisher by profession, he had some years before, when business
was at full tide, scented out the stagnation which, indeed, had
not yet come, but which ultimately, as all agreed, was bound to
set in, and, selling his share in a firm engaged mainly in the
production of religious books, had invested the quite conspicuous
proceeds in three per cent. consols.  By this act he had at once
assumed an isolated position, no other Forsyte being content with
less than four per cent.  for his money; and this isolation had
slowly and surely undermined a spirit perhaps better than
commonly endowed with caution.  He had become almost a myth--a
kind of incarnation of security haunting the background of the
Forsyte universe.  He had never committed the imprudence of
marrying, or encumbering himself in any way with children.
James resumed, tapping the piece of china:
"This isn't real old Worcester.  I s'pose Jolyon's told you
something about the young man.  From all I can learn, he's got no
business, no income, and no connection worth speaking of; but
then, I know nothing--nobody tells me anything."
Aunt Ann shook her head.  Over her square-chinned, aquiline old
face a trembling passed; the spidery fingers of her hands pressed
against each other and interlaced, as though she were subtly
recharging her will.
The eldest by some years of all the Forsytes, she held a peculiar
position amongst them.  Opportunists and egotists one and all--
though not, indeed, more so than their neighbours--they quailed
before her incorruptible figure, and, when opportunities were too
strong, what could they do but avoid her!
Twisting his long, thin legs, James went on:
"Jolyon, he will have his own way.  He's got no children"--and
stopped, recollecting the continued existence of old Jolyon's
son, young Jolyon, June's father, who had made such a mess of it,
and done for himself by deserting his wife and child and running
away with that foreign governess.  "Well," he resumed hastily,
"if he likes to do these things, I s'pose he can afford to.  Now,
what's he going to give her?  I s'pose he'll give her a thousand
a year; he's got nobody else to leave his money to."
He stretched out his hand to meet that of a dapper, clean-shaven
man, with hardly a hair on his head, a long, broken nose, full
lips, and cold grey eyes under rectangular brows.
"Well, Nick," he muttered, "how are you?"
Nicholas Forsyte, with his bird-like rapidity and the look of a
preternaturally sage schoolboy (he had made a large fortune,
quite legitimately, out of the companies of which he was a
director), placed within that cold palm the tips of his still
colder fingers and hastily withdrew them.
"I'm bad," he said, pouting--"been bad all the week; don't sleep
at night.  The doctor can't tell why.  He's a clever fellow, or I
shouldn't have him, but I get nothing out of him but bills."
"Doctors!" said James, coming down sharp on his words: "I've had
all the doctors in London for one or another of us.  There's no
satisfaction to be got out of them; they'll tell you anything.
There's Swithin, now.  What good have they done him?  There he
is; he's bigger than ever; he's enormous; they can't get his
weight down.  Look at him!"
Swithin Forsyte, tall, square, and broad, with a chest like a
pouter pigeon's in its plumage of bright waistcoats, came
strutting towards them.
"Er--how are you?" he said in his dandified way, aspirating the
'h' strongly (this difficult letter was almost absolutely safe in
his keeping)--"how are you?"
Each brother wore an air of aggravation as he looked at the other
two, knowing by experience that they would try to eclipse his
ailments.
"We were just saying," said James, "that you don't get any
thinner."
