Soames walked upstairs.  Passing the drawing-room without a look,
he went straight up to his mother's and father's bedroom.
James, standing sideways, the concave lines of his tall, lean
figure displayed to advantage in shirt-sleeves and evening
waistcoat, his head bent, the end of his white tie peeping askew
from underneath one white Dundreary whisker, his eyes peering
with intense concentration, his lips pouting, was hooking the top
hooks of his wife's bodice.  Soames stopped; he felt half-choked,
whether because he had come upstairs too fast, or for some other
reason.  He--he himself had never--never been asked to....
He heard his father's voice, as though there were a pin in his
mouth, saying: "Who's that?  Who's there?  What d'you want?" His
mother's: "Here, Felice, come and hook this; your master'll never
get done."
He put his hand up to his throat, and said hoarsely:
"It's I--Soames!"
He noticed gratefully the affectionate surprise in Emily's:
"Well, my dear boy?" and James', as he dropped the hook: "What,
Soames!  What's brought you up?  Aren't you well?"
He answered mechanically: "I'm all right," and looked at them,
and it seemed impossible to bring out his news.
James, quick to take alarm, began: "You don't look well.  I
expect you've taken a chill--it's liver, I shouldn't wonder.
Your mother'll give you...."
But Emily broke in quietly: "Have you brought Irene?"
Soames shook his head.
"No," he stammered, "she--she's left me!"
Emily deserted the mirror before which she was standing.  Her
tall, full figure lost its majesty and became very human as she
came running over to Soames.
"My dear boy!  My dear boy!"
She put her lips to his forehead, and stroked his hand.
James, too, had turned full towards his son; his face looked
older.
"Left you?" he said.  "What d'you mean--left you?  You never told
me she was going to leave you."
Soames answered surlily: "How could I tell?  What's to be done?"
James began walking up and down; he looked strange and stork-like
without a coat.  "What's to be done!" he muttered.  "How should I
know what's to be done?  What's the good of asking me?  Nobody
tells me anything, and then they come and ask me what's to be
done; and I should like to know how I'm to tell them!  Here's
your mother, there she stands; she doesn't say anything.  What I
should say you've got to do is to follow her.."
Soames smiled; his peculiar, supercilious smile had never before
looked pitiable.